>> What is human potential?
Just how far can it take us?
What if I were to tell you
that the purpose of our highest
potential is to transcend
limited thinking
and bring it into superhuman
or cosmic consciousness?
Hi, I'm Ben Stewart.
Welcome to the nexus point
between your old life
and your new self.
In this series, we will be
unlocking the deepest mysteries
of our human potential.
And as with all
great journeys, we
will begin with the unparalleled
power of the question mark.
Just what are we capable of?
When you look at
yourself in the mirror,
do you see that
what you are right
now, the finished
product, no more no less?
Or do you see that what you
are capable of becoming?
The only thing standing between
you, who and what you are now,
and a future filled with
unlimited possibilities
is a belief that you hold
about you and the world
that you live in.
So when I say the words full
potential or peak potential,
what does that conjure
up in your mind?
What do you think of?
Do you think of the people that
can lift the heaviest weights,
run the fastest,
jump the highest,
hold the breath the longest?
What about withstanding the
most extreme conditions?
Or super memory, super
recall, the ability
to read faster
than anybody else?
Are these the
things you think of?
And mind you, that everything
that I've just mentioned
are truly the outward or
more masculine qualities.
What about the
feminine qualities,
the ones that are more
hidden, such as intuition,
grace in the face
of great adversity,
compassion when
it's needed most,
and fertility, being
pregnant with possibility?
These are less measurable
and so less talked about.
But they're just as, if not
more important in the path
of our greatest potential.
So I liken our human potential
with a seed or plant.
Once the conditions are set,
enough food, water, light,
it will simply grow.
No force required.
In fact, force will
only hinder it.
So are the conditions for
your potential to grow set?
And if not, what's
holding you back?
Are there people,
forces, situations, vows
and commitments that you've
made, a form of self sabotage
that you engage in
that holds you back
from what you could become?
So I'll ask you
one more question.
The word impossible,
what does it mean to you?
If you think of it, this
word will inscribe itself
into your brain and
into your behavior.
So be very careful of
how you define that word.
Now, the brain isn't the
only and most important
organ that we have.
But it is the one
that neuroscientists
and modern science seems
to focus on the most.
So let's just start right there.
The brain.
Two hemispheres and three
lobes, very uniquely set up.
And even though there's
been a little bit
of a myth in the past that the
right hemisphere is completely
creative and the left
hemisphere is totally logical,
this has been
dispelled to a bit,
but neuroimaging has
helped us see that we
do have two distinct brains.
And they think
distinctly different.
So now let's take a
look at a series called
"Steps Away from the Future."
This episode called "The
Hidden Side of the Brain"
will show you something about
the evolution of our brain
that you may not have known.
>> Of course, talking about the
left side and the right side
of the brain is
a simplification.
Our brain isn't a map, as
people used to assume naively
in the last century.
It's characterized by an
astonishing plasticity, which
localizes on the right side
of the brain functions, that,
or on the left side
and other people.
Nevertheless, in most
cases, the functions
of analysis and logical
reasoning are on the left,
whereas visual and intuitive
functions are on the right.
There's a snowstorm
on the little city
of Fond du Lac, Wisconsin.
This is where Dr.
Darold Treffert lives.
This psychiatrist has
dedicated 40 years of his life
to the Savant syndrome.
>> We are a left
hemisphere society.
We depend on our
left hemisphere.
It serves us well, logical,
sequential thinking, language,
things that have served as well.
They serve us so
well that we begin
to use only that
well-worn pathway, sort
of to the neglect of
the rest of the brain,
the right hemisphere.
Yet, some people call that the
tyranny of the left hemisphere.
>> Now the human brain went from
1,440 grams about 150,000 years
ago, and then it put it into
reverse and brought it back
to 1,300 grams meaning our brain
has shrunk in the past 150,000
years.
So the question we must
ask ourselves is why?
There is a book called
"Return to the Brain of Eden"
by Tony Wright and
Graham Gynn, and they've
done amazing work looking
at just this question.
In this book, they also
talk about Savant syndrome,
the amazing ability
for our brain
to be able to incur
some kind of a damage
and then the healthy
parts of the brain
take over those functionalities.
These Savants actually have
a gift that no one else has.
Now we're going to go back to
"Steps Away from the Future,"
and that episode "The
Hidden Side of the Brain,"
because they dive
a little bit deeper
into this Savant syndrome.
>> Kim Peek was the inspiration
for the movie "Rain Man,"
and I was a consultant
to the movie.
And that's where we first met.
Kim is what I call the
Mount Everest of memory.
He has memorized 12,000
books, word for word.
He has a factual memory within
15 areas of expertise that
simply history,
biography, in the Bible,
you simply cannot stump him.
And one of the most
amazing things about him
is that he reads so quickly,
he reads one page with one eye,
and he reads the other
page with the other eye,
and immediately goes to his hard
disk, and it's stored there.
I keep saying at some point, the
image has to come up disk full,
but it never does.
>> The human brain is
divided into two hemispheres,
and they have two very
different functions.
So this is a human brain.
And so you're looking now at the
external surface of the brain.
This is the left hemisphere.
This is the right hemisphere.
And you can see
here, that they're
divided into two halves.
And the two hemispheres process
different kinds of information
in different ways.
So the right hemisphere
is all about experiencing
the present moment.
It's all about right
here, right now.
In the right here right now,
there are no boundaries.
Everything is
perceived as energy.
And so the atoms and molecules
just experience the energy,
and they blend with one another,
so that there's the big picture
vision.
So the right hemisphere
thinks in pictures,
and it's all about the
right here right now.
The left hemisphere takes
that present moment experience
and then breaks it
down into details.
And part of the details is our
language, our ability to speak,
our ability to make
sound, our ability
to place meaning on that sound.
And part of that sound is
my ability to say I am.
I am an individual.
And as soon as I
say I am, then I
exist separate from all
of the energy around me.
So the two hemispheres
work together in order
for us to have a single
perception of reality.
>> And so there is that huge
store of material in all of us,
and the question is how can
we access that without having
an injury or some kind
of central nervous system
catastrophe?
And that's where our research
is leading us these days.
>> The process of
neuroplasticity is the ability
for our brain and certain
regions of it to adopt
functions of the injured
portions of the brain.
But without injury, you can
still prompt neuroplasticity,
which is the restructuring
of your brain,
simply by things like new and
novel forms of moving the body,
outside the box
ways of thinking,
and also sinking the body
and mind, very intelligently.
And these are ways
that, without injury, we
can actually prompt
neuroplasticity,
the restructuring of our brain.
There's even tasks like
using your less dominant hand
to write, to brush your teeth,
open doors with, shake hands
with, even using your less
dominant foot to kick or jump
or take your first step with.
These things prompt
neuroplasticity.
But the question
I have for you now
is how far can
neuroplasticity truly take us?
Let's take a look at a
film called "Sonic Magic--
The Wonder of
Science and Sound."
>> Bats actually see with sound.
>> Perhaps even more astonishing
is the fact that some humans
are able to do the same thing.
>> So we've got a tree here.
I'll turn here.
>> By 13 months of age,
Daniel Kish had lost both eyes
to a cancer called
retinoblastoma.
Instinctively, he soon began
to make a clicking sounds
and started to echo
locate just like bats do.
Those clicks you hear
are from his mouth, not
the tapping of his cane.
>> Big open area, but we're
approaching a structure.
>> He calls this flash sonar.
[CLICKING]
Flash sonar has become Kish's
primary means of navigation.
>> So in my case, it wasn't
something I was really aware
of.
It just happened
as a consequence
of my childhood experiences.
[CLICKING]
I get an image that occurs
in a 360 degree field.
The roof structure we're under
isn't totally solid somehow.
It's got openings in it,
as if it were slatted or--
I describe them
as fuzzy geometry,
moving, dynamic figures.
They have depth and
contour and character,
and they provide
me with information
about location, density.
And you can also kind of
hear things around corners,
and you can hear
things through objects.
So you know, it always has this
kind of omnipresence about it.
[CLICKING]
As a kid, I was raised
to think of myself
as pretty unremarkable.
My parents, their emphasis,
their regard for me was you're
a kid like any other kid.
>> We asked him to draw a
picture to recreate from memory
the image he got from nothing
more than the sound of clicks.
>> I'll just do a
little dash line here.
>> And remember, he had never
set foot in this pavilion
before today.
>> And then we had another
column kind of across the way
here.
Definitely taxing my
artistic merits here.
Should I say tada?
Tada!
>> The accuracy of
the image is uncanny.
>> It shows that there is an
actual imaging process taking
place.
You're using sound instead
of light to create a picture.
>> We are truly
adaptable creatures.
I think that's what
this video showed me.
And Daniel Kish is one of
the best examples of this.
He didn't injure his brain.
He injured his eyes.
Yet his brain still adapted.
He received the gift that
most anybody in the world
will never receive, simply
because the conditions arose,
and he said yes
to the challenge.
So now I want to ask you
that first question again.
What does impossible
mean to you?
And are you willing to believe
that you can't do something
if you've never tried it?
I want to bring your attention
to some people who have
overcome extreme adversity.
One of them is Viktor Frankl.
In World War II, he was
experimented on and tortured.
In many ways, all
the people around him
that were healthier,
stronger, smarter,
all of their life expectancies
were dropping to zero,
and many of them were dying.
They couldn't fathom the amount
of pain that they were under,
but Victor survived.
He did so, and he said
later, why, why he believes
he survived such
incredible atrocities.
And it was because he knew
that he must tell people
about his journey.
He had some work to
do in the future.
This gave him purpose
that superseded
all of the pain and the
suffering he was going through.
Victor was quoted as
saying, "Everything
can be taken from a
man, but one thing,
the last of the human freedoms,
to choose one's attitude
in any given set
of circumstances,
to choose one's own way."
Another example is
Stephen Hawking.
He had a amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis.
A British scientist with
amazing accomplishments,
he fathered children.
He authored many very
pivotal scientific books, all
without the use of his body.
Then there's Frida Kahlo,
stricken with polio
at an early age, suffered
a very severe car accident,
and had chronic pain in
her back for the rest
of her life in a way that most
people would be bedridden,
but not Frida.
She knew she had to paint.
She knew she had
to express herself.
So she did, and she
became a renowned painter.
Then there's Helen Keller.
Born deaf and blind and
despite these setbacks,
despite two of her
greatest sense organs
being taken from her
from birth, she still
authored about 400
articles, several books,
was involved in women's
rights and politics.
And even Albert
Einstein, thought
to have dyslexia and maybe
even Asperger's, didn't
speak until the age of four.
Although he is one of the most
celebrated scientific minds
in history, he is quoted as
saying, "Everybody is a genius.
But if you judge a fish by
its ability to climb a tree,
it will spend its whole life
believing that it is stupid."
Side note, none of
these individuals
went down in history as
the people with poor luck.
They are known for
incredible accomplishments.
Now I want to bring it
deeper, the shamans,
stories of shamans that go back
many, many thousands of years.
Many of these stories
actually begin
when the shaman suffered
some kind of an injury
or had a fever that prompted
innate capacities to come out
that they never knew they had.
So by taking a look
at these stories,
were these individuals just the
crazy people in the society?
Not the shamans.
The shamans were
looked at as one
of the most respected
and heralded positions
in any tribe.
The information that they
would bring back to the tribe
was so useful that they were one
of the most respected roles you
could imagine in any tribe.
And one hallmark of shamans
is entering an altered state.
One of the ways they did
this was through the use
of psychedelic plants.
Now we're going to take a
look at a Gaia original series
called "Psychedelica."
>> One of the fundamental
effects of psychedelics is
to integrate material that's
normally not accessible
to consciousness, and the
fundamental way in which
psychedelics make this
information available is
by a destabilizing of what's
called the default mode
network, this part of the
brain that integrates our sense
of self, our
autobiographical memories,
and our reflection
upon our lives.
So basically, what's
happening under psychedelics
is a liberation of the parts
of the brain that 80% or 90%
of the brain that
they say we don't use.
And we use it, but we're
just not able to access it.
Psychedelics give us
access to that unconscious.
>> The language facility in the
brain is destabilized as well.
So the combination
of our self identity
and our language
being put off balance
by simply ingesting
a plant gives rise
to the ineffability
of the experience.
Just as we see with any mystical
or spiritual experience,
words are not enough to
communicate the magnitude
of the experience.
>> I want to reiterate what
Michael Winkelman had said
right there.
80% to 90% of our brains
that we're not accessing.
Now this brings up
a myth, and the myth
is that we only use
10% of our brains.
But that's talking
about neural activity.
It's not talking
about potential.
And this is where
the myth comes in,
because George Leonard
actually explains in the 1960s,
he researched 37
psychiatrist, brain
researchers, and specialists on
the topic of human potential.
And he said, not
one of them were
quoted as saying that
we use more than 10%
of our power, our ability
to learn and perform,
calculating and creative
cognitive tasks.
George Leonard wrote a
book called "Mastery,"
and he says, "We fail to
realize that mastery is not
about perfection.
It's about a process, a journey.
The master is the one
who stays on the path day
after day, year after year.
The master is the one who is
willing to try and fail and try
again for as long
as he or she lives."
So now I want to ask
you again a question
that I asked you before.
What is holding you back from
the rest of your potential?
And if you keep going beneath
all the layers, deeper
and deeper, you'll
come to realize
what most people come to realize
when they ask these questions,
and that's the only thing
holding you back is you.
Author and podcaster Tim Ferriss
said that fear is your friend.
It is an indicator.
Oftentimes it will show
you what you shouldn't do,
but more often than not, it
shows you what you should do,
meaning that there is a
gift hidden, encrypted
inside all of our fears.
And instead of
running from them,
ignoring them, pushing them
away, actually embracing them,
facing them, and seeing
what they have to say
is where the true gift lies.
I personally believe
that we are not
held back by conditions or
principles of the universe,
as much as we are held back
by a lack of imagination
and a lack of clarity
on what we truly want
to work towards in our lives.
We know that the
power of belief is
something that is talked about,
sometimes is exaggerated about.
But the placebo effect is one
example of the incredible power
of the mind and belief.
We know that all
pharmaceutical trials
have to set up and beat
the placebo effect in order
to go to market.
And we give all the credit
to the pharmaceuticals.
But we don't give any credit
to the placebo effect,
the power of belief.
And the reductionists and the
scientists may scoff at this
and say that we exaggerate
a little bit too much.
But if something
works, it simply works.
And the power of
belief does just that.
We're living in a
very unique world, one
that we scarcely understand.
Even the scientists
will agree on this.
Albert Einstein, who
we already mentioned,
one of the most celebrated
scientific minds in all
of history, is quoted as saying
that, "Time and space are
modes by which we think and not
conditions in which we live."
Think about that.
That's a powerful statement,
one of the fathers
of modern science saying
that time and space are not
conditions outside of us,
but modes by which we think.
And thinking can be changed.
At the same time that
Albert Einstein fathered
one branch of science,
being modern physics,
another branch was
birthed, and this
is the branch of quantum
physics and quantum mechanics.
And Niels Bohr said that if
quantum mechanics has not
profoundly shocked you, then
you haven't understood it yet.
Now in this series,
we will go deeper
into the quantum phenomena
and the implications
that it has on our path
towards our potential.
But for now, just
realize that there
is a world beneath this world.
The fabric of our reality
is much more peculiar
than we've thought.
This fabric responds
to our thinking.
It engages with
our consciousness.
And it exists all around us.
So where do we begin in such
a weird and trippy world?
Well, humbly I believe we begin
right where we're at, no more,
no less, by removing
the obstacles that we
have placed in our own way.
Aeschylus, a Greek playwright,
said that from a small seed
a mighty trunk may grow.
So that seed of
your potential, will
grow into a mighty tree that can
withstand thousands of storms.
This potential exists
within you right now.
So what I'm asking of you is
to see more in that mirror
than just the flesh and
blood staring back at you.
I want you to remember that you
are far more than you've ever
considered.
You are actually your entire
impact upon this planet.
This is why the Native
American Indians, when
their council
would sit and speak
about the future of
their tribe, they
had one credo that they
would adhere to most of all.
They said, in our every
deliberation, we must consider
the impact that our decisions
will have upon the next seven
generations, meaning
long after you're gone,
your impact on this world
will still be ringing.
So instead of just
leaving you with a bunch
of intellectual, conceptual
ideas to toss around,
I want to leave you with some
real practical tips and tools
that you can take
and employ right now.
On a piece of paper, draw
a line down the middle.
On the left side,
write down some things
that you feel are
impossible for you,
right now, things like it's
impossible for me to run a mile
or get married.
Meditate for a moment
on what you've written.
Then on the right
side of the page,
write down the first
solution you think
of for each of these doubts.
Be practical.
Try to stick as close to
the things that are just
out of reach instead of finding
the most extreme examples
of impossibility.
We're not claiming to
be superheroes just yet.
And throughout the week,
come back to this list
and re-evaluate your doubts and
see day by day how they change.
If you employ these tips
just a few times before you
see me next, you will
begin to demystify
what you believe is
impossible, and hopefully
have realized that it is only
your doubts that keep you
from living to your
full potential.
Thank you very much
for joining me,
and I'll see you next
time on "Limitless."